Add documentation for marking preview APIs (#40328)
dotnet/docs: docs/fundamentals/apicompat/preview-apis.md

---
title: Preview APIs

> description: Provides an understand how APIs can be marked as preview.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn how to mark .NET APIs as preview.
```

ms.date: 4/4/2024
---

# Preview APIs

> The .NET platform prides itself with taking compatibility very seriously. As

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The .NET platform prides itself with taking compatibility seriously. As
```

> The .NET platform prides itself with taking compatibility very seriously. As
> such, the the library ecosystem tends to avoid making breaking changes,
> especially with respect to the API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The .NET platform prides itself with taking compatibility very seriously. As such, the library ecosystem tends to avoid making breaking changes, especially with respect to the API.
```

> Nonetheless, when designing APIs it's important to collect feedback from users

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nonetheless, when designing APIs, it's important to collect feedback from users
```

> and change the API based on their feedback. To avoid surprises, it's important

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and change the API based on that feedback if necessary. To avoid surprises, it's important
```

> Nonetheless, when designing APIs it's important to collect feedback from users
> and change the API based on their feedback. To avoid surprises, it's important
> that users understand which APIs are considered stable and which ones are still
> in active development and might change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nonetheless, when designing APIs, it's important to collect feedback from users and change the API based on their feedback. To avoid surprises, it's important that users understand which APIs are considered stable and which ones are still in active development and might change.
```

There are multiple ways an API can express to be in preview form:

> * The entire component is considered preview:
>     - Exposed in a preview release of the .NET runtime
>     - Exposed in a prerelease NuGet package
> * An otherwise stable component specifically marks certain APIs as preview:
>     - Marked with <xref:System.Runtime.Versioning.RequiresPreviewFeaturesAttribute>
>     - Marked with <xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.ExperimentalAttribute>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The entire component is considered preview:

    - Exposed in a preview release of the .NET runtime
    - Exposed in a prerelease NuGet package

- An otherwise stable component specifically marks certain APIs as preview:

    - Marked with <xref:System.Runtime.Versioning.RequiresPreviewFeaturesAttribute>
    - Marked with <xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.ExperimentalAttribute>
```

> This document explains how to chose between these and how each of them work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This article explains how to choose between these options and how each of them works.
```

## .NET runtime previews

> For the exception of RCs with a go-live license, preview versions of the .NET

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the exception of release candidates (RCs) with a go-live license, preview versions of the .NET
```

> For the exception of RCs with a go-live license, preview versions of the .NET
> runtime and SDK aren't supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the exception of RCs with a go-live license, preview versions of the .NET runtime and SDK aren't supported.
```

As such, any APIs added as part of a .NET preview are considered subject to

> change, based on feedback the previews receive. In order to use a .NET runtime

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
change, based on feedback the previews receive. To use a .NET runtime
```

> preview, you need to explicitly target a newer framework version. By doing so

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
preview, you need to explicitly target a newer framework version. By doing so,
```

> As such, any APIs added as part of a .NET preview are considered subject to
> change, based on feedback the previews receive. In order to use a .NET runtime
> preview, you need to explicitly target a newer framework version. By doing so
> you implicitly express consent to consume APIs that might change.

Reviewer: Each paragraph should be a single line :P

```suggestion
As such, any APIs added as part of a .NET preview are considered subject to change, based on feedback the previews receive. In order to use a .NET runtime preview, you need to explicitly target a newer framework version. By doing so you implicitly express consent to consume APIs that might change.
```

## Prerelease NuGet packages

> NuGet packages can either be stable or marked as prerelease, that is the package

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NuGet packages can either be stable or marked as prerelease, that is, the package
```

has a prerelease suffix. For example, `System.Text.Json 9.0.0-preview.2.24128.5`
has a prerelease suffix of `preview.2.24128.5`.

> Package authors generally don't support prerelease packages and use as a means

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Package authors generally don't support prerelease packages and use them as a means
```

to collect feedback from early adopters.

> When installing packages, either via the CLI or via UI, you generally have to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When installing packages, either via the CLI or UI, you generally have to
```

> NuGet packages can either be stable or marked as prerelease, that is the package
> has a prerelease suffix. For example, `System.Text.Json 9.0.0-preview.2.24128.5`
> has a prerelease suffix of `preview.2.24128.5`.
> 
> Package authors generally don't support prerelease packages and use as a means
> to collect feedback from early adopters.
> 
> When installing packages, either via the CLI or via UI, you generally have to
> explicitly indicate whether you want to install prerelease, again implicitly
> expressing consent to consume APIs that might change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NuGet packages can either be stable or marked as prerelease, that is the package has a prerelease suffix. For example, `System.Text.Json 9.0.0-preview.2.24128.5` has a prerelease suffix of `preview.2.24128.5`.

Package authors generally don't support prerelease packages and use as a means to collect feedback from early adopters.

When installing packages, either via the CLI or via UI, you generally have to explicitly indicate whether you want to install prerelease, again implicitly expressing consent to consume APIs that might change.
```

## `RequiresPreviewFeaturesAttribute`

> Since .NET 6, the platform includes <xref:System.Runtime.Versioning.RequiresPreviewFeaturesAttribute>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since .NET 6, the platform includes the <xref:System.Runtime.Versioning.RequiresPreviewFeaturesAttribute> attribute.
```

> This is used for APIs that require preview behaviors across the stack, including

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This attribute is used for APIs that require preview behaviors across the stack, including
```

> the runtime, the C# compiler, and libraries. When consuming APIs marked with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the runtime, the C# compiler, and libraries. When you consume APIs marked with
```

> this attribute you will receive a build error unless your project sets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this attribute, you'll receive a build error unless your project sets
```

> `<EnablePreviewFeatures>true</EnablePreviewFeatures>`. Doing so will also set

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`<EnablePreviewFeatures>true</EnablePreviewFeatures>`. Setting that property to `true` also sets
```

`<LangVersion>Preview</LangVersion>`, allowing the use of preview language
features.

> We used that in .NET 6 to test out generic math, which required static interface

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The .NET team used the <xref:System.Runtime.Versioning.RequiresPreviewFeaturesAttribute> attribute in .NET 6 to test out generic math, because it required static interface
```

> This is used for APIs that require preview behaviors across the stack, including
> the runtime, the C# compiler, and libraries. When consuming APIs marked with
> this attribute you will receive a build error unless your project sets
> `<EnablePreviewFeatures>true</EnablePreviewFeatures>`. Doing so will also set
> `<LangVersion>Preview</LangVersion>`, allowing the use of preview language
> features.
> 
> We used that in .NET 6 to test out generic math, which required static interface
> members which were in preview at the time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is used for APIs that require preview behaviors across the stack, including the runtime, the C# compiler, and libraries. When consuming APIs marked with this attribute you will receive a build error unless your project sets `<EnablePreviewFeatures>true</EnablePreviewFeatures>`. Doing so will also set `<LangVersion>Preview</LangVersion>`, allowing the use of preview language features.

We used that in .NET 6 to test out generic math, which required static interface members which were in preview at the time.
```

> members which were in preview at the time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
members, which were in preview at the time.
```

## `ExperimentalAttribute`

.NET 8 added <xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.ExperimentalAttribute>, which doesn't
require any runtime or language preview features and simply indicates that a given API isn't
stable yet.

When building against an experimental API, the compiler will produce an error.

> Each feature that is marked as experimental will have its own separate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each feature that is marked as experimental has its own separate
```

> diagnostic ID. In order to express consent to using them, you suppress the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
diagnostic ID. To express consent to using them, you suppress the
```

specific diagnostic. You can do that via any of the means for suppressing
diagnostics, but the recommended way is to add the diagnostic to the project's
`<NoWarn>` property.

Since each experimental feature has a separate ID, consenting to using one
experimental feature doesn't consent to using another.

> ## Choosing between them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Choose appropriate attribute
```

> ## Choosing between them

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Choose between the options
```

> Library developers should only be using prerelease NuGet packages or marking

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Library developers should only use prerelease NuGet packages or mark
```

APIs with `[Experimental]`:

* For new APIs introduced in a prerelease version of your package, you don't

>   need to do anything, the package already expresses preview quality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  need to do anything; the package already expresses preview quality.
```

* If you want to ship a stable package that contains some preview quality APIs,
  you should mark those APIs using `[Experimental]`. Ensure to use [your own

>   diagnostic ID][choosing-diagnostic-ids] and make it specific to these

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  diagnostic ID][choosing-diagnostic-ids] and make it specific to those
```

  features. If you have multiple independent features, consider using multiple
  IDs.

> The `[RequiresPreviewFeatures]` is only meant for components of the .NET

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `[RequiresPreviewFeatures]` attribute is only meant for components of the .NET
```

platform itself. And even there it's only used for APIs that require runtime and

> language preview features. If it's just an API that is in preview, the .NET

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
language preview features. If it's just an API that's in preview, the .NET
```

> platform uses `[Experimental]` as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
platform uses the `[Experimental]` attribute.
```

> The exceptions to this rule is if you're building a stable library and want to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The exception to this rule is if you're building a stable library and want to
```

The .NET team used the <xref:System.Runtime.Versioning.RequiresPreviewFeaturesAttribute> attribute in .NET 6 to test out generic math, because it required static interface members, which were in preview at the time.

## `ExperimentalAttribute`

.NET 8 added <xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.ExperimentalAttribute>, which doesn't require any runtime or language preview features and simply indicates that a given API isn't stable yet.

When building against an experimental API, the compiler will produce an error. Each feature that is marked as experimental has its own separate diagnostic ID. To express consent to using them, you suppress the specific diagnostic. You can do that via any of the means for suppressing diagnostics, but the recommended way is to add the diagnostic to the project's `<NoWarn>` property.

Since each experimental feature has a separate ID, consenting to using one experimental feature doesn't consent to using another.

## Choose between the options

> Library developers should only use prerelease NuGet packages or mark APIs with `[Experimental]`:

Reviewer 3: You're using "you" in some parts and specific groups like "library developers" "package authors" elsewhere. Either change to 3rd person throughout, or make sure it's clear which group "you" refers to

> * For new APIs introduced in a prerelease version of your package, you don't need to do anything; the package already expresses preview quality.

Reviewer 4: Should we mention that as a preview package reaches go-live state that we might choose to add `[Experimental]` at that point if we feel the API needs more time for feedback?

Author: Isn't that covered by the second bullet (shipping preview functionality in an otherwise stable component)?
